Rework of 'Scopes' and 'Variable Resolution' Sections (#257)
openwdl/wdl: versions/development/SPEC.md

      * [Struct Member Access](#struct-member-access)
      * [Importing Structs](#importing-structs)
* [Namespaces](#namespaces)

> * [Value Scopes and Reachability](#value-scopes-and-reachability)

Reviewer: I'm not used to seeing the term `Reachability` in this context. Most language descriptions I've seen use `Visibility` to describe this concept.

Author: I'll replace with visibility

Each namespace may contain namespaces, tasks, and at most one workflow.  The names of the contained namespaces, tasks, and workflow need to be unique within that namespace. For example, one cannot import two workflows while they have the same namespace identifier. Additionally, a workflow and a namespace both named `foo` cannot exist inside a common namespace. Similarly there cannot be a task `foo` in a workflow also named `foo`.
However, you can import two workflows with different namespace identifiers that have identically named tasks. For example, you can import namespaces `foo` and `bar`, both of which contain a task `baz`, and you can call `foo.baz` and `bar.baz` from the same primary workflow.

# Value Scopes and Reachability

## Top Level Scopes

> The top level scopes which can contain value declarations are:

Reviewer: This is a minor point, but I think where the spec says `declaration` what's actually meant is `definition`. Conventionally, a declaration binds a name in a scope but doesn't provide the name's value, or require that a value is defined. E.g. in C/C++, you put function declarations in header files and function definitions in source (.c/cpp) files. Some languages don't support declarations separate from definitions, and I think WDL falls into this category. Therefore all named values are definitions (as are tasks and workflows).

Reviewer 2: At a quick glance (IOW: he's shooting from the hip and not validating what he says) this is likely an artifact of "The spec matches terminology to how Hermes describes things", which isn't really a great policy going forward

Author: I'll happily go along with `definition`.

* `workflow {...}` definitions
* `task {...}` definitions

Within these top-level scopes, various sub-sections exist which can also contain value declarations:

* `scatter` blocks
* `if` blocks

> * `input` sections

Reviewer: This is probably not important for this PR, but it's unclear what the difference between blocks and sections are. The text also uses `section` to refer to sections of the document itself, so using `block` everywhere might be better. Unless there's a semantic difference between blocks and sections.

Author: Fair enough. In my head I use the two interchangeably but I'm happy to prefer `block` over section for the sake of clarity

* `output` sections

Some sub-sections provide scoped values:

* `scatter(x in ...)` provides a value `x` **only within the scatter's `{...}` block**

## Input, Output and Graph Values

> Values declared within a `task` are either inputs or outputs. Workflows have inputs and outputs as well, and also allow declaration of "graph" values.

Reviewer: I think it would be clearer to avoid the use of `graph` here, e.g.
```suggestion
Values declared within a `task` are either inputs or outputs. Workflows can define values in an input block, an output block, or at the top level.
```

Author: I'll rework this section and rename "graph value" to "intermediate value" since that I think has been used elsewhere in the spec

> * Inputs are evaluated before anything else in the task or workflow is started.

Author: I've made a mention of this - and reworded this to be more explicit - all values can really be evaluated as soon as their inputs are available, and there's not really much special about inputs other than that they can be supplied by users, or outputs except that they get collected for users at the end.

> * Outputs are evaluated after everything else in the task or workflow completes.

Author: I believe they would be considered "intermediate values" even if they follow the `command`. I'll make it clearer that that means they get evaluated before the command runs.

That said - I can foresee a value (perhaps in a more targeted future PR) in allowing some way - perhaps positionally - of specifying "post-command, non-output values"

* Graph values are evaluated as part of the normal execution of the workflow DAG. This means that they can be evaluated as soon as all their dependencies are available.
* Examples of dependencies which graph values may have include:
    * Inputs
    * `call` outputs

>     * Other graph values

Reviewer: I agree that the use of `graph` and `DAG` don't make things clearer and, to me, are implementation details. I think the important point to make is that values that are defined at the top level of a workflow are evaluated in an order determined by their dependencies, which is implied by the acyclic description below. The evaluation order could be made explicit here as well.

Maybe a less loaded name for these values would be top-level values, or workflow values. (vs workflow input values and workflow output values)

>     * Other graph values

Author: I'll try rewording and replacing "graph value" with "intermediate value" since that's the term used elsewhere in the spec.

* Scatter variables are 

## Value Reachability Rules

* Within a top-level (`workflow` or `task`) scope, each value name is unique and always reachable.
    * Exception: `scatter` value names 
        * For example the value named `x` in the line `scatter(x in ...) { ... }`
        * Scatter values are only accessible within the scope of the scatter block
        * Scatter value names can be reused as scatter value names by other scatter blocks
    * Exception: `output` values

>         * Because they must be calculated last, `output` values are *not* reachable from outside the `output` section.

Author: I think so - it should be possible to determine an order on outputs just as easily as for inputs/intermediate values.

* A graph value may be used as a depenency higher up in the WDL file than the location where it is declared.
    * This is OK because graph execution order is defined by the DAG, not the order in the page.
    * See the [Forward Reference](#forward-reference) example.
* Despite values being reachable from outside sub-sections, the types of values may change if accessed from outside:
    * Using a value which was declared within a `scatter` from outside that `scatter` implicitly collects the results, turning any X into an `Array[X]`.
    * Using a value which was declared within a `if` from outside the `if` implicitly optionalizes the results, turning any `X` into an `X?`.
* References must always be acyclic:
    * If "`a` depends on `b`" then it cannot also be true that "`b` depends on `a`".

>     * References must also not cause cyclic dependencies between sub-sections. See the [Acyclic Sub-Sections](#acyclic-sub-sections) for an example of what this means.

Author: I'll make that explicit

    * Using a value which was declared within a `scatter` from outside that `scatter` implicitly collects the results, turning any `X` into an `Array[X]`.
    * Using a value which was declared within a `if` from outside the `if` implicitly optionalizes the results, turning any `X` into an `X?`.
* References must always be acyclic:
    * If "`a` depends on `b`" then it cannot also be true that "`b` depends on `a`".
    * Values defined inside a `scatter` or `if` block are not available to evaluate the respective `scatter` or `if` expression.  
    * References must also not cause cyclic dependencies between sub-blocks of a task or workflow. 
      * See the [Acyclic Sub-Sections](#acyclic-sub-sections) for an example of what this means.

## Examples

### Task Scoping

```wdl
version development

task my_task {
  input {
    Int x
    File f
  }

  Int y = x + 1

  command {
    my_cmd --integer1=~{x} --integer2=~{y} ~{f}
  }

  output {
    Int z = read_int(stdout())
    Int z_plus_one = z + 1
  }
}
```

* `x` and `f` are `input` values which will be evaluated before the task begins.

> * `y` is a graph value with an upstream depenency on the input `x`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `y` is an intermediate value with an upstream dependency on the input `x`.
```

> * The `command` section is able to access all `input`s and graph values. It is not able to reference `output` values.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The `command` section is able to access all `input`s and intermediate values. It is not able to reference `output` values.
```
